Desenvolvimento de Aplicações Móveis
Mobile Application Development
DAM

Tutorial1-HelloWorld
Abstract

Ana Duarte Correia
ana.correia@isel.pt
António Teófilo
antonio.teofilo@isel.pt

Pedro Fazenda
pedro.fazenda@isel.pt

This assignment familiarizes students with Kotlin and
Android development. It starts with installing IntelliJ
IDEA and working through Basic Types and Control
Flow concepts. Students then set up Android Studio
and build their first “Hello, World!” Android application. The assignment also introduces Classes and Objects to strengthen object-oriented programming skills.
In addition, students are introduced to agentic programming, giving them the opportunity to explore intelligent, autonomous coding approaches and experiment
with other mobile development platforms beyond Android. Optional challenges are provided for those who
want to explore further. Overall, the goal is to establish
a strong Kotlin foundation while keeping the learning
process engaging and enjoyable.

Deadline: March 08th, 2026

Hello Kotlin. Hello Android World!
Monday, February 23rd, 2026

Tutorial 1 - Hello Kotlin. Hello Android World!

Contents
1 Introduction
1.1 Oﬀicial documentation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.2 AI Usage Policy and Academic Integrity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.3 Assignments Submission and Deadline Policy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.4 Reports [AC YES, AI YES] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1.5 Document structure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1
1
1
2
2
4

2 Getting Started with Kotlin [AC NO, AI NO]
2.1 Exercise 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.2 Exercise 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2.3 Exercise 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

4
5
5
6

3 Android Introduction and Preliminary Steps
6
3.1 Overview of the Android Development Environment . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
3.2 Download and installation of Android Studio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
3.3 Installation of Android development libraries (SDKs) . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
3.4 Checking for Updates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
3.5 Creating Android Virtual Devices (VDs/AVDs) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
3.6 Setting Up Your Phone for App Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
4 Building Your First Android App [AC YES, AI NO]
14
4.1 Create a “Hello Mobile World” Application . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
4.2 Improve your application - Hello World v2 [AC YES, AI NO] . . . . . . . 18
5 About Android Studio
5.1 Useful shortcuts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5.2 Logging and Monitoring App State [AC YES, AI NO] . . . . . . . . . . .
5.3 Building a System Info App [AC YES, AI NO] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

19
19
19
21

6 Exploring Kotlin Again [AC NO, AI NO]
6.1 Base requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.2 Extended requirements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.3 Expected Implementation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.4 Expected Console Output . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.5 Assessment Criteria . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

22
23
24
25
25
26

7 Return and Enhance your Android experience [10%] [AC YES, AI NO] 26
8 Assisted code generation - MIP [20%] [AC YES, AI YES]

27

Tutorial 1 - Hello Kotlin. Hello Android World!

List of Figures
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15

Configure in Welcome window. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
SDK manager . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Android Studio Welcome:“Check for Updates”. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Virtual Device: choosing system image. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Virtual Device: choosing system image. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Device Manager: list of existing Virtual Devices. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Choose your project - Empty Views Activity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Configure you project. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Main files. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Resource files. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Res. img. files. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Hello World app. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Hello World app v2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
AS with dynamic string and breakpoint. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Hello World Optional, showing information about the current build. . . . .

9
10
11
12
13
13
14
15
15
15
15
17
18
21
22

Tutorial 1 - Hello Kotlin. Hello Android World!

1

Introduction

This assignment introduces students to the fundamentals of Kotlin and Android development. The purpose of this guide is to provide a comprehensive introduction to the
language, development environment, and basic programming concepts essential for the
development of mobile applications. At the end of this assignment, students will acquire
a basic understanding of Kotlin and Android development.

1.1 Oﬀicial documentation
For oﬀicial documentation, in Kotlin and Android Development, see:
Kotlin docs: https://kotlinlang.org/docs/home.html; and
Android Developers Guide: https://developer.android.com/guide.

1.2 AI Usage Policy and Academic Integrity
The emergence of artificial intelligence in code generation represents a major breakthrough
for the software industry. It offers a significant advantage in software development by
accelerating code writing, improving productivity, assisting with debugging, and lowering barriers to entry for novice programmers. AI-assisted coding tools can also support
learning by providing examples, explanations, and alternative solutions, thereby exposing
students to a wider range of programming practices and design patterns.
However, these benefits are accompanied by important cognitive drawbacks. Excessive
reliance on AI tools may hinder the development of fundamental problem-solving skills,
reduce deep understanding of programming concepts, and encourage superficial learning.
Students may become less capable of designing solutions independently, debugging unfamiliar code, or critically evaluating the correctness and eﬀiciency of generated programs.
Over time, this dependency can negatively affect analytical thinking, creativity, and longterm retention of knowledge. For these reasons, the use of AI-assisted coding must be
carefully balanced with activities that promote independent reasoning and mastery of
core programming skills.
Hence, throughout assignments and lectures in this course, students will encounter
tasks in which the use of AI-based tools must not be used at all, including auto-complete
features, which is explicitly restricted. This limitation is imposed for pedagogical reasons.
Tasks will be marked with AC (Auto-complete) YES or NO and AI (Artificial Intelligence
assistance) YES or NO to show when you can use these features or not. To turn off Autocomplete by AI Assistant go to Settings (on Windows/Linux Settings, on MAC: IntelliJ
IDEA -> Settings), then go to: Tools -> AI Assistant, then disable options: Inline code
completion and Automatic suggestions and deactivate any other AI code completions.
Only the standard non-AI code completion is allowed. Artificial Intelligence assistance
refers to any method of generating code from written, spoken, or otherwise described
instructions (e.g., text or voice prompts).

1

Tutorial 1 - Hello Kotlin. Hello Android World!
The objective is to ensure that students are able to solve specific problem sets independently, starting from a blank slate, without relying on external assistance. Developing
these foundational skills is essential to build a strong understanding of the underlying
concepts and acquire the desired competence.
There will also be sections of the coursework in which the use of AI tools is permitted
or even mandatory, reflecting their growing relevance in modern software development
practices. Clear instructions will be provided for each assignment to indicate when AI
assistance is allowed or required.
When using AI or auto-complete tools, you remain fully responsible for all content
and must be able to justify every part of it. Failure to do so will result in those parts
being excluded from grading.

1.3 Assignments Submission and Deadline Policy
The following requirements are valid for all assignments (TP1 ... TP4) and for the final
project.
All development must be conducted under version control using GitHub. The
latest commit pushed before the deadline indicated on the assignment cover page will be
considered for grading. The commit history must clearly reflect the progression of your
work throughout the project, with entries spanning from the beginning to the end (not
only a final commit). Compliance with this requirement (like with all requirements) is
part of the grading criteria.
Late submissions will incur a penalty. The assignment grade will be reduced by 1
point (out of 20) for each day past the deadline until the last commit (including the
report Markdown file(s)).
All assignments must be presented to the instructor and evaluated during class hours
within the two weeks following the assignment deadline. Attendance is mandatory. Failure
to comply will result in a grade of 0 for the corresponding assignments.

1.4 Reports [AC YES, AI YES]
For each GitHub repository submitted as part of an assignment, a report must also be
included in the repository in Markdown format.
See the Markdown Cheatsheet or the Quickstart for Writing on GitHub for guidance
on this markup language.
You must include a README.md file. If additional Markdown files are needed, place
them in the docs directory (e.g., docs/report_2_1.md).
You may use AI tools to assist in writing the reports.
Follows the required structure for the README.md file:
# Assignment X —Title
<!-- Replace X and Title -->
Course: ___________________
Student(s): _______________
Date: _____________________
Repository URL: ___________
---

2

Tutorial 1 - Hello Kotlin. Hello Android World!

## 1. Introduction
<!-- Purpose of the assignment, problem description, and objectives. -->
## 2. System Overview
<!-- High-level description of the solution, main features, and use cases. -->
## 3. Architecture and Design
<!-- Architecture, folder structure, design patterns, and justification of key
decisions. -->
## 4. Implementation
<!-- Implementation details: main modules, components, algorithms, and relevant code
excerpts. -->
## 5. Testing and Validation
<!-- Testing strategy, test cases, scenarios, edge cases, and known limitations. -->
## 6. Usage Instructions
<!-- How to run the project: requirements, setup, configuration, and execution steps.
-->
--# Autonomous Software Engineering Sections - only for [AC OK, AI OK] sections
## 7. Prompting Strategy
<!-- Describe the prompts used with AI tools, their purpose, and how they evolved.
Include representative examples. -->
## 8. Autonomous Agent Workflow
<!-- Explain how AI tools or agents contributed to development: planning, coding,
debugging, testing, documentation, etc. -->
## 9. Verification of AI-Generated Artifacts
<!-- Describe how you verified correctness of AI-generated code/designs (testing,
manual review, static analysis, etc.). -->
## 10. Human vs AI Contribution
<!-- Clearly state which parts were primarily human-developed and which were
AI-assisted. -->
## 11. Ethical and Responsible Use
<!-- Reflect on risks, limitations, biases, or inappropriate outputs from AI tools
and how they were handled. -->
--# Development Process
## 12. Version Control and Commit History
<!-- Describe how version control was used. The commit history must reflect
continuous work (not only final commits). -->
## 13. Difficulties and Lessons Learned
<!-- Main challenges, mistakes, insights, and skills acquired during the assignment.
-->
## 14. Future Improvements
<!-- Possible extensions, optimizations, or features that could be added in future

3

Tutorial 1 - Hello Kotlin. Hello Android World!
work. -->
--## 15. AI Usage Disclosure (Mandatory)
<!-- List all AI tools used (e.g., ChatGPT, Copilot, etc.), how they were used, and
confirmation that you remain responsible for all content. -->

1.5 Document structure
The tutorial begins with an introduction to Kotlin, covering its Basic Types and Control
Flow to help students understand fundamental programming concepts. Once students
have a basic grasp of the language, they will proceed with the development of their first
mobile Android application, starting with a simple “Hello, World!” project.
Following this, the assignment introduces the concepts of Classes and Objects, reinforcing object-oriented programming principles within Kotlin.
Finally, students return to Android programming to deepen their experience and explore AI-assisted code generation.
These topics provide a foundation for building simple Android applications.

2

Getting Started with Kotlin [AC NO, AI NO]

Let us learn the core concepts of Kotlin and how to get started with it. Start by downloading and installing the latest version of IntelliJ IDEA. Then create your first Kotlin
project with a simple Hello, World program. Once you have successfully executed your
code, you can move on to building the applications outlined below.
Keep in mind that this task is meant to be an enjoyable and exciting challenge. Resist
the temptation to use any AI-based code assistance tools. Throughout your career, you
will have plenty of opportunities to take advantage of these tools. At this stage, your focus
should be on developing your programming skills, critical thinking, debugging abilities,
and mental flexibility. Everything you need to complete these exercises can be found in
the Kotlin documentation:
Kotlin Docs - https://kotlinlang.org/docs/home.html.
At this stage, focus on the following sections under Concepts:
1. Basic Types
2. Control Flow
3. Classes and Objects
For the Kotlin exercises in this assignment, you must create a Kotlin project using
Maven and a Git repository. For each Android app in the assignment, you must create a
separate Android project with its own repository. For other assignments, follow the same
approach.

4

Tutorial 1 - Hello Kotlin. Hello Android World!
Create a Kotlin project in IntelliJ named DAM_TP1 (use similar names for other assignments).
In IntelliJ, select: New → Project → Kotlin, Maven, Create Git repository.
Run the Main.kt file to ensure everything is properly set up.
Create the packages required for this assignment: dam, dam.exer_1, dam.exer_2,
dam.exer_3, dam.virtual_library.
Add the file dam.exer_1/exer_1.kt and copy the content of existing Main.kt file to
it (save it, add it to repository - and for all new files) and run it to verify the setup again.
Open Commit tab (below Project icon tab, in top leftmost bar, or look for it), select
all files, add the Commit message: initialize project structure with Kotlin and Maven
configuration and do Commit.
For this exercise it is only required that you use a local repository and do Commit.
Later we will move to remote repository, and then we will do Commit and Push.
Then delete its contents and start implementing the exercise.
Repeat the actions for each remaining exercise as you reach it.
Enjoy the process and have fun with the code!

2.1 Exercise 1
Create and initialize an integer array with the first 50 perfect squares (12 , 22 , 32 , ..., 502 )
dynamically, using the following:
• a) Using IntArray constructor;
• b) Using a range and map();
• c) Using Array with constructor;

2.2 Exercise 2
Create a console-based calculator that allows users to perform various operations. Your
implementation should incorporate the following Kotlin features:
1. The when expression for handling different operations.
2. Exceptions to handle potential errors (e.g., division by zero, invalid input).
3. String templates and string formatting for a clear and structured output.
Your calculator should support the following:
1. Basic arithmetic operations: Addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division.
2. Boolean operators: AND (&&), OR (||), NOT (!).
3. Bitwise shift operators: Left shift (shl), right shift (shr).
4. Show the results in decimal, hexadecimal, and boolean.
Note: Ensure that the program provides user-friendly prompts and gracefully handles
invalid input.
5

Tutorial 1 - Hello Kotlin. Hello Android World!

2.3 Exercise 3
A ball is dropped from a height of 100 meters. Each time it bounces, it reaches 60% of its
previous height. Write a program using generateSequence to model the bounce heights,
filter to keep only bounces that reach at least 1 meter high, take the first 15 qualifying
bounces, convert to a list, and print the heights rounded to 2 decimal places. Print the
sequence.
Hint: You will need to think about how to represent each bounce height based on the
previous one. Also, refer to the oﬀicial documentation at Kotlin Sequences - generateSequence 1 and analyze the following code to understand its functionality.

3

Android Introduction and Preliminary Steps

First, an introduction to the Android development environment is presented to provide a
high-level overview of what Android is and how it works.
Second, to enable the development and execution of Android applications, this tutorial
covers the installation of the IDE, the development libraries (Software Development Kit
— SDK), and the emulator. It also ensures that the latest software versions are installed
and configures your Android phone as a development target.

3.1 Overview of the Android Development Environment
Android OS was initially developed by Android Inc., a company co-founded by Andy
Rubin in the early 21st century with the goal of creating a powerful and innovative mobile
operating system. In 2005, Google acquired Android Inc., recognizing its potential to
transform the mobile industry. Following the acquisition, Andy Rubin was appointed
as the director of Google’s mobile platforms, leading the evolution of Android into what
would become the world’s most widely used operating system for smartphones and tablets.
Android OS is built on the Linux Kernel, making Android devices essentially
Linux-based computers. The development and maintenance of the Android system are
managed by the Android Open Source Project (AOSP), an initiative led by Google
to promote an open and flexible mobile ecosystem.
The execution of Android applications is handled by the Android Runtime (ART),
which is specifically designed for mobile environments and uses ahead-of-time (AOT) and
just-in-time (JIT) compilation to optimize performance.
When Android code is compiled, it produces Dalvik Executable (.dex) files.
These .dex files, together with resources and manifest files, are packaged into an .apk
file — the standard format for installing Android applications on devices. For distribution
through Google Play, applications are typically published as Android App Bundles (.aab),
which are later converted into optimized APKs for each device.
There are four main components (plus one - Layouts) in Android applications 2 :
1

https://kotlinlang.org/api/core/kotlin-stdlib/kotlin.sequences/generate-sequence.

html
2

https://developer.android.com/guide/components/fundamentals

6

Tutorial 1 - Hello Kotlin. Hello Android World!
• Activities - (organizational layer) an Activity supports a screen for user interaction;
• Layout Containers - (presentation layer) a Layout is a container for user interface
elements in a screen;
• Services - (background processing layer) a Service is a component that runs in
background, providing services for Activities;
• Broadcast Receivers - (notification layer) a Broadcast Receiver is a component
that allows the Activities to receive notifications from the system (and react to
them);
• Content Providers - (storage layer) a Content Provider is a component that store
and provide data for Activities.
There are also some important helper classes:
• Android Fragments - they are reusable parts of the user interface;
• Android Intents - they enable communication between components.
These elements will be introduced in more detail later. For now, we focus on Android
Activities and Layouts.
An Activity is a screen that provides context for user interactions. Applications may
have multiple activities to manage content across mobile screens with various sizes and
resolutions. Each activity includes a Layout Container that holds UI elements and can
change dynamically.
A Layout Container organizes UI elements, called Widgets, which include text,
graphics, 3D content, video, menus, and animations. Layouts are based on the ViewGroup class, while Widgets derive from the View class.
Android graphics, such as images and animations, are called Drawables. Event
handling allows UI elements to respond to user actions and other events.

3.2 Download and installation of Android Studio
Android Studio is the oﬀicial Android Integrated Development Environment (IDE) for
Android Development.
1. Download the latest Android Studio installation from the following link:
https://developer.android.com/studio (Current version: Panda 1 | 2025.3.1)
The Android Studio package includes all the tools necessary for the development of
android applications:
• Android Studio IDE - to edit, run, debug Android code
• Android SDK and Tools Manager - to install Android SDKs and tools
• Android Emulator - to execute Android apps in Android emulated devices
7

Tutorial 1 - Hello Kotlin. Hello Android World!
• Android Virtual Device (AVD) manager - to create and manage AVDs.
Note:If you were programming in Java, you would also need to install the Java
Development Kit (JDK) and the Java Runtime Environment (JRE).
2. Execute the “android-studio-panda1-windows.exe” file obtained with the previous
download to install the Android Studio package (if you are using windows, otherwise
choose your appropriate installation).
3. Run the Android Studio IDE.
4. You will go through several configuration steps to install Android Studio.

3.3 Installation of Android development libraries (SDKs)
There are several versions of the Android platform.
They have a version number, a codename, and an API level, such as Android 12
Snow Cone (API 31), Android 13 Tiramisu (API 33), and Android 14 Upside
Down Cake (API 34).
To develop code for a specific platform, you need the corresponding libraries, known
as the Software Development Kit (SDK).
For example, to develop code for Android 13 (API 33), you need its Android SDK
platform and tools.
The management of installed SDKs, as well as the installation of new ones, is handled
through the SDK Manager, which is available in Android Studio.
It is recommended to install the latest stable version of Android, such as Android 14
(API 34), along with at least one older version, like Android 10 (API 29) or another
that matches the highest version supported by the student’s device.
1. Open the Android SDK Manager. Do it at the “Welcome to Android Studio”
window (when there is no Project opened), by selecting the “More Actions (3
dots on top right)” drop down list and choosing SDK Manager (see Figure 1)
or when we are working on a project by opening the menu Tools > SDK Manager
or by selecting the SDK Manager icon in the toolbar.
2. In the SKD Manager panel (see Figure 2) select the Android version you wish to
develop and are not installed by checking them and then press the “OK” button.
Select the “Show Package Details” checkbox to see in detail the components that
are part of each version of the Android API.

3.4 Checking for Updates
It is recommended to keep Android Studio and all platforms and tools up to date. After
installation, it is a good time to check for the latest updates. In the Android Studio
Welcome screen, when no project is opened, updates can be checked by selecting the
Settings (gear icon) → Check for Updates option (see Figure 3).

8

Tutorial 1 - Hello Kotlin. Hello Android World!

Figure 1: Configure in Welcome window.
When working on a project, updates can be checked via the menu Help → Check
for Updates... on Windows/Linux, or Android Studio → Check for Updates... on
macOS.
Note: It is advisable to install only stable versions and avoid Beta versions unless
specifically required.

3.5 Creating Android Virtual Devices (VDs/AVDs)
An Android Virtual Device (AVD) is a software-based emulator that replicates the
behavior of a physical Android device.
AVDs allow testing Android applications on different Android versions and hardware
configurations without requiring a physical device.
The AVD Manager is a tool that facilitates the creation of AVDs for various device
types, including Phone, Tablet, TV, Automotive, and Wear OS.
It provides several predefined hardware profiles, but users can also create or import
custom profiles as needed.
It is recommended to have at least two AVDs:
• One Pixel 9 Pro smartphone
• One Pixel Tablet
The AVD Manager allows creating AVDs based on a specific hardware profile and
an Android platform version.
To set up an AVD, you must select both a hardware profile and an Android system
image.
It is advisable to choose the latest stable Android API version compatible with
your physical device. This ensures that applications run consistently on both the virtual
device
1. Open the AVD Manager in one of the following ways:
9

Tutorial 1 - Hello Kotlin. Hello Android World!

Figure 2: SDK Manager: SDK Platforms.
• From the Welcome to Android Studio window (when no project is opened),
select the ”More Actions” drop-down menu and choose Device Manager.
• When working on a project, open the menu Tools → Device Manager.
• Click on the Device Manager icon in the toolbar.
2. Create two virtual devices (VDs): one for a Pixel 9 Pro smartphone and another
for a Pixel Tablet.
• Start by clicking the ”Create Device” button in the Virtual Device Configuration panel (Select Hardware), see Figure 4.
• Choose the appropriate hardware profile for the selected virtual device.
• Click ”Next” to proceed.
3. In the VD system image panel, see Figure 5, select the Android platform version,
hardware architecture (x86, ...) and the supported Google services (Google Play, ...),
download it if necessary and then click the “Next” button. Use the recommended
configuration and leave the remaining parameters, for now, set to “default” and
finish.
4. Start the Pixel 9 Pro AVD. After creating the emulators, you can see them in the
Device Manager panel (see Figure 6). In that list, click the “play” button on the
Pixel 9 Pro smartphone emulator to launch it.
Note 1: The first launch of a virtual device (VD) may take several minutes,
depending on the computing power of the PC. Interrupting the VD during the
startup process may cause corruption, requiring its reconfiguration or deletion.
10

Tutorial 1 - Hello Kotlin. Hello Android World!

Figure 3: Android Studio Welcome:“Check for Updates”.
Note 2: Once the virtual device (VD) is started, it should remain running
throughout development. Instead of stopping or closing it, simply re-deploy the
application to the VD after making code changes.
Note 3: When creating an emulator, you can choose between the ”Snapshot”
and ”Host GPU” options. If you choose the ”Snapshot” option, the emulator
saves a copy of its memory state when stopped, similar to hibernation. This allows
for a much faster startup the next time it is launched. If you choose the ”Host
GPU” option, the emulator renders graphics more eﬀiciently by utilizing the
PC’s graphics card, improving performance.
Note 4: When selecting the Android API version during emulator creation,
you can choose a VD image based on either an ARM or Intel CPU architecture.
A VD based on Intel architecture runs significantly faster on an Intel-based
PC, as it eliminates the need to translate ARM instructions into the PC’s Intel
architecture.

3.6 Setting Up Your Phone for App Development
This setting described in this section may change depending on your phone. In general,
for most phones, you can use the procedures described below. If these do not work on
your phone, search online for the specific steps for your device.
1. Enable Installation from Unknown Sources
With Android 8.0 (Oreo), the process of allowing installation from unknown
sources has changed.
11

Tutorial 1 - Hello Kotlin. Hello Android World!

Figure 4: Virtual Device: choosing system image.
• For Android 8.0 and above:
– Go to Settings > Apps & notifications > Special app access >
Install unknown apps.
– Select the app (e.g., your browser or file manager) you intend to use to
install APKs.
– Enable the option ”Allow from this source”.
• For Android 7.1 and below:
– Go to Settings > Security.
– Enable the option ”Install unknown apps”.
– Confirm by tapping ”OK”.
Note: The exact path may vary slightly depending on your device manufacturer
and the Android version.
2. Enable Developer Options
To install and debug applications on your phone, you must activate Developer
options.
• Open Settings > About phone.
• Tap Build number seven times.
• Enter your device’s PIN or password if asked.
• Return to Settings, and you will find Developer options listed.
12

Tutorial 1 - Hello Kotlin. Hello Android World!

Figure 5: Virtual Device: choosing system image.

Figure 6: Device Manager: list of existing Virtual Devices.
Note: The location of the Build number can vary; it is usually found in About
phone or Software information.
3. Enable USB Debugging
After activating Developer options, enable USB debugging:
• Open Settings > Developer options.
• Enable the option ”USB debugging”.
Note: USB debugging allows your computer to communicate with your device for
development purposes. Ensure that you trust the computer to which you are connecting.
For more detailed information, refer to the oﬀicial Android documentation:
https://developer.android.com/studio/command-line/adb
Note: Always exercise caution when enabling these settings, as they can expose your
device to security risks.
13

Tutorial 1 - Hello Kotlin. Hello Android World!

4

Building Your First Android App [AC YES, AI NO]

4.1 Create a “Hello Mobile World” Application
1. Create a New Android Project Open Android Studio and navigate to File
> New > New Project to open the project creation dialog (see Figure 7).
• Select the Empty Views Activity option.
• Click Next to proceed.
This option will generate a basic application containing a single activity, providing
a simple starting point for development.

Figure 7: Choose your project - Empty Views Activity
2. Configure Project Details
• Enter the application name: Hello World.
• Specify the package name: dam_aXXXXX.helloworld (see Figure 8).
• Replace aXXXXX with your student number.
• Use this base package name for all your projects.
• Set the project save path as: dam-path\code\HelloWorld, where dam-path is
the directory for DAM.
• Select Kotlin as the programming language.
• Choose API 24: Android 7.0 (Nougat) as the Minimum API level.
• Click Finish to generate the project.

14

Tutorial 1 - Hello Kotlin. Hello Android World!

Figure 8: Configure you project.
Note 5: When selecting the Minimum API level, the configuration wizard will
display the estimated percentage of devices that support each version, along with the
new features introduced in that version. Take the time to review the new features
of each API version before making a selection.
Note 6: After pressing the Finish button, some installations of the IDE may report
an error related to Gradle JDK:
No matching variant of com.android.tools.build:gradle:...

If you encounter this issue, change the Gradle JDK to another version in the
following location: File > Settings > Build, Execution, Deployment > Build
Tools > Gradle. Download a different JDK version if necessary.
3. Inspect the generated code. As you can see in Figure 9 the Android Studio creates
three sections for files: manifests, java, and res. An application must contain a

Figure 9: Main files.

Figure 10: Resource files.
15

Figure 11: Res. img. files.

Tutorial 1 - Hello Kotlin. Hello Android World!
manifest file that defines essential app information, including:
• The app’s package name.
• Declared components such as activities, services, broadcast receivers,
and content providers, along with their properties.
• Required permissions.
• Hardware and software features needed by the app.
The java section contains Java (.java) and Kotlin (.kt) files. It should include Activity files and all other Java/Kotlin source files. These files are organized according
to the defined package structure. By default, the project contains one Activity.
The res (resources) section, as illustrated in Figure 10, contains the following resource directories:
• drawable – for image and graphic resources.
• layout – for XML layout files.
• mipmap – for launcher icons (see Figure 11).
• values – for XML resource values such as strings, themes, and dimensions.
Inspect the content of all files.
To explore the activity_main.xml file, view it in different modes: Code, Split,
and Design, by selecting the corresponding icons located at the top-right side of
the editor window.
4. Run the Application on the Pixel 9 Pro AVD Execute the application in the
Pixel 9 Pro AVD using one of the following methods:
• Select Run > Run ”app” from the menu.
• Press Shift + F10.
• Click the green play button in the toolbar (located to the right of the device
drop-down box, next to ”No Devices” in Figure 3).
In the device selection window, choose your Pixel 9 Pro AVD smartphone and
click the ”OK” button. The AVD will display the contents shown in Figure 12.
Verify the created elements on the emulator screen to ensure the application runs
correctly.
Note 7: This process may take some time. Please be patient. If the execution
becomes unresponsive, try closing the AVD and restarting the application.
5. Define Strings in the strings.xml File. Strings should be defined in the
strings.xml file to support internationalization (this will be covered later).
In strings.xml, each string is identified by a unique name. To reference a string
in XML layouts, use @string/strname (if the string is named strname).
Modify the TextView text to use strings.xml:
16

Tutorial 1 - Hello Kotlin. Hello Android World!

Figure 12: Hello World app.
• Open activity_main.xml and select the existing string "Hello World!".
• Press ALT + ENTER and choose ”Extract string resource”.
• Enter hello_string as the resource name and press OK.
Verify that the android:text property of the TextView now contains:
@string/hello_string,
and that the new string hello_string is declared in strings.xml.
Run the application to apply the changes.
Modify and Test Strings in strings.xml
• Change the string hello_string (in strings.xml) to "Hello Android World".
• Run the application again to see the updated text.
Change the Application Name
• Modify the app name in strings.xml to "Hello World V1".
• Run the application again to verify the change.
Run and Debug the Application on a Physical Device. Use Android Debug
Bridge (ADB) to run and debug the application on a real device:
• Connect your device using a USB cable.
• Alternatively, use WiFi for debugging.

17

Tutorial 1 - Hello Kotlin. Hello Android World!
For more details, refer to the oﬀicial Android documentation:
https://developer.android.com/studio/command-line/adb.

4.2 Improve your application - Hello World v2 [AC YES, AI NO]
1. Change the app name (in strings.xml) to “Hello World V2”. Run the application
(do the same for remaining points).
2. Change the TextView to the top and change some properties. You should have
the window in Split mode (select in top right corner), with the Palette view at
the left, the design editor in the middle, and the Attributes view at the right.
In the design editor, select the TextView and in its bottom constraint give a left
mouse click with the CTRL pressed to remove that constraint. To add a new
constraint, if necessary, just stretch a new one from a source point (one of the
circles) to an anchor point such as, e.g., another TextView, the edge of the screen
or a horizontal/vertical barrier. Set its attributes: textColor (use colors placed in
colors.xml, e.g., purple_500), textSize and textStyle, to look the same as in 13.
3. Add a second TextView with “My First App” text (strings to strings.xml), by
dragging one from the palette to the middle of the graphic editor. Connect the top
graphical constraint to the bottom of the other TextView. Change the attributes
of the TextViews to change: layout_width (set to 0dp to use all width), textSize,
textAlignment and background to look the same as in 13.

Figure 13: Hello World app v2.
4. Add an image to the screen, as shown in Figure 13. Download a small image
from the web and add it to the “drawable” folder. The image name should have
18

Tutorial 1 - Hello Kotlin. Hello Android World!
only lower-case letters. From the palette view drag an ImageView element to the
layout of activity_main.xml. In “Pick a resource view” select the image. It will
add to the ImageView: app:srcCompat=“@drawable/smileygood” (if smile is the
name of the image file). You will see a yellow warning because the image does
not have a description. Add a content Description (alternative text) to ImageView:
android:contentDescription=”Just smile” (strings to strings.xml).
5. Add a CalendarView to the layout, as shown in Figure 13.
6. Add a Landscape layout variant.
7. Add an app icon.

5

About Android Studio

5.1 Useful shortcuts
1. Rename. This action allows you to rename an artifact (such as a class, method,
variable, or package). Ensure that all occurrences of the artifact are renamed consistently throughout the project. To activate this action:
• Go to: Menu > Refactor > Rename.
• Or press Shift + F6.
2. Format Code. This action automatically formats the code to improve readability
and maintain consistent styling. To activate this action:
• Go to: Menu > Code > Reformat Code.
• Or press Ctrl + Alt + L.
3. Organize Imports. This action helps to automatically manage the import statements. It adds necessary imports (if referenced artifacts are correctly used) and
removes unused ones. To activate this action:
• Go to: Menu > Code > Optimize Imports.
• Or press Ctrl + Alt + O.

5.2 Logging and Monitoring App State [AC YES, AI NO]
1. Observing Messages in Logcat. The Logcat view allows you to visualize the
execution messages sent by the device.
• If the ”No Filters” option is selected in the right drop-down box, all messages
from the device will be displayed.
• To filter messages related only to a specific application, select the option
”Show only selected application” in the drop-down box.
• The second left drop-down box specifies the application being observed.

19

Tutorial 1 - Hello Kotlin. Hello Android World!
• The first drop-down box allows you to select the device, while the third dropdown box sets the message log level.
2. Sending Messages to Logcat. To send output to Logcat, we can use the standard console output, i.e., System.out. To send a message indicating that we are
inside the onCreate method of the Activity, follow these steps:
• Open the MainActivity.kt file.
• At the end (but still inside) of the onCreate method, insert the following line:
println(this@MainActivity.localClassName + " onCreate")

• Run the application and observe the Logcat output. You should see the
message appearing in the log.
In the next tutorials, we will use the Log class to send messages more effectively.
3. Setting a Dynamic String. Now, we will store the message in the strings.xml
file.
• Double-click on the Activity string to select it.
• Press ALT + ENTER and choose ”Extract String Resource”.
• In the Extract Resource dialog box, enter the following:
– Resource name: activity_oncreate_msg
– Resource value: "Activity %1$s onCreate"
Strings with dynamic content, such as the one in onCreate, use the String.format()
method. In this case, %1$s acts as a placeholder for the first argument, treated as a
string. Now, complete the call to getString() by adding a second argument that
specifies the value to be displayed. This should result in:
getString(R.string.activity_oncreate_msg, this@MainActivity.localClassName)

Run the application again to see the updated output. Refer to Figure 14 for the
expected results.

4. Capturing the Screen. The Logcat view provides two icons to capture the device
screen:
• Screen Capture – represented by a camera icon - allows taking a screenshot
of the device screen.
• Screen Record – represented by a green play icon, enables recording the
screen activity.
5. Execute in Debug Mode . To run the application in Debug Mode, you first
need to set a breakpoint to pause execution at a specific point.
• Place a breakpoint on the print line from the previous step by clicking in the
left margin/column of the code editor.
20

Tutorial 1 - Hello Kotlin. Hello Android World!

Figure 14: AS with dynamic string and breakpoint.
• A red circle should appear, indicating the break point (see the red circle on
line 15 in Figure 14).
Run the app in Debug Mode using one of the following methods:
• Go to Menu > Run > Debug ’app’.
• Press Shift + F9.
• Click the Bug icon in the toolbar (highlighted with a red circle in Figure 14).
Once the application is running in Debug Mode:
• Observe that Logcat does not yet display the print(...) message.
• Execute the print instruction by selecting: Menu > Run > Step Over, or
pressing F8.
• The Logcat should now display the message: "Activity MainActivity onCreate".
To stop a debug session, click the red square in the toolbar. Check the Variables
view inside the Debug tab to inspect the values of existing variables.

5.3 Building a System Info App [AC YES, AI NO]
Create a new application that displays information about the current device build on a
MultiLine Text Widget. The information should be extracted from the properties of
the system, as shown in Figure 15.
Note 8: For this application, use the android.os.Build object to retrieve the necessary information.

21

Tutorial 1 - Hello Kotlin. Hello Android World!

Figure 15: Hello World Optional, showing information about the current build.

6

Exploring Kotlin Again [AC NO, AI NO]

At this point in your assignment, you should have already covered the concepts of Classes
and Objects in class. Now, let us return to console programming using IntelliJ IDEA
for a practical exercise. Through this assignment, you will master object-oriented programming concepts in Kotlin, understand inheritance and polymorphism, practice custom
getters and setters with business logic, implement collection management, and work with
abstract methods and companion objects. Build in dam.exer_vl package.

Assignment - A Virtual Library
You have been hired as a software developer for a Virtual Library Management
System. Your task is to design a system that manages various types of books and library
operations.
• Each book should have common attributes such as title, author, publication year,
and available copies.
• Different book formats (digital vs. physical) have unique characteristics that differentiate them from one another.
• The library must support core operations such as borrowing, returning, and searching for books.
• Your implementation must adhere to the object-oriented principles in Kotlin.

22

Tutorial 1 - Hello Kotlin. Hello Android World!
Apply your knowledge of classes, objects, inheritance, and encapsulation to build a
structured and scalable solution that could serve as the foundation for a real-world library
management system.

6.1 Base requirements
Implement the following features in Kotlin to create a comprehensive library management
system:
Class Book (Base Class)
The Book class serves as the base class for all book types in the Virtual Library. It includes
the following features:
• Properties: title, author, publicationYear, and availableCopies.
• A primary constructor to initialize these properties.
• A custom getter for publicationYear that returns:
– "Classic" if the publication year is before 1980.
– "Modern" if the publication year is between 1980 and 2010.
– "Contemporary" otherwise.
• A custom setter for availableCopies that:
– Prevents negative values.
– Prints a warning message if someone tries to set copies to 0: "Warning: Book
is now out of stock!"
• An init block that prints a message when a Book object is created, including the
title and author.
Classes DigitalBook and PhysicalBook (Subclasses)
The DigitalBook and PhysicalBook classes inherit from the Book base class and introduce additional properties specific to their formats.
• DigitalBook Class:
– Includes an additional property: fileSize (in MB).
– Includes an additional property: format (e.g., "PDF", "EPUB", "MOBI").
– Has its own constructor that calls the parent constructor.
• PhysicalBook Class:
– Includes an additional property: weight (in grams).
– Includes an additional property: hasHardcover, which is set to true by default.
– Has its own constructor that calls the parent constructor.
23

Tutorial 1 - Hello Kotlin. Hello Android World!
Class Library (Manager)
The Library class is responsible for managing a collection of books within the Virtual
Library.
• Stores a list of books.
• Implements the method addBook() to add new books to the collection.
• Implements the method borrowBook(title: String) that:
– Searches for a book by title.
– Decreases availableCopies by 1 if the book is found and copies are available.
– Prints an appropriate message for success or failure.
• Implements the method returnBook(title: String) that:
– Searches for a book by title.
– Increases availableCopies by 1 if the book is found.
– Prints a confirmation message.
• Implements the method showBooks() to print details of all books in the library.
• Implements the method searchByAuthor(author: String) to display all books
by a specific author.

6.2 Extended requirements
Extend the functionality of the classes by implementing the following features:
• Override the toString() method in each class to provide a custom string representation of the objects.
• Implement an abstract method getStorageInfo() in the Book class, which
must be defined in each subclass:
– For DigitalBook: Returns storage information (e.g., "Stored digitally:
5.2 MB, Format: PDF").
– For PhysicalBook: Returns physical information (e.g., "Physical book: 450g,
Hardcover: Yes").
• Add a companion object to the Library class that tracks:
– Total number of books added across all library instances.
– A method getTotalBooksCreated() to retrieve this count.
• Implement a data class LibraryMember with properties: name, membershipId, and
borrowedBooks (list of book titles).

24

Tutorial 1 - Hello Kotlin. Hello Android World!

6.3 Expected Implementation
Listing 1: Example Usage
fun main() {
val library = Library("Central Library")
val digitalBook = DigitalBook(
"Kotlin in Action",
"Dmitry Jemerov",
2017,
5,
4.5,
"PDF"
)
val physicalBook = PhysicalBook(
"Clean Code",
"Robert C. Martin",
2008,
3,
650,
true
)
val classicBook = PhysicalBook(
"1984",
"George Orwell",
1949,
2,
400,
false
)
library.addBook(digitalBook)
library.addBook(physicalBook)
library.addBook(classicBook)
library.showBooks()
println("\n--- Borrowing Books ---")
library.borrowBook("Clean Code")
library.borrowBook("1984")
library.borrowBook("1984")
library.borrowBook("1984") // Should fail - no copies left
println("\n--- Returning Books ---")
library.returnBook("1984")
println("\n--- Search by Author ---")
library.searchByAuthor("George Orwell")
}

6.4 Expected Console Output
Book 'Kotlin in Action' by Dmitry Jemerov has been added to the library.
Book 'Clean Code' by Robert C. Martin has been added to the library.
Book '1984' by George Orwell has been added to the library.
25

Tutorial 1 - Hello Kotlin. Hello Android World!

--- Library Catalog --Title: Kotlin in Action, Author: Dmitry Jemerov, Era: Contemporary, Available: 5 copie
Storage: Stored digitally: 4.5 MB, Format: PDF
Title: Clean Code, Author: Robert C. Martin, Era: Modern, Available: 3 copies
Storage: Physical book: 650g, Hardcover: Yes
Title: 1984, Author: George Orwell, Era: Classic, Available: 2 copies
Storage: Physical book: 400g, Hardcover: No
--- Borrowing Books --Successfully borrowed 'Clean Code'. Copies remaining: 2
Successfully borrowed '1984'. Copies remaining: 1
Successfully borrowed '1984'. Copies remaining: 0
Warning: Book is now out of stock!
Sorry, -- Returning Books --Book '1984' returned successfully. Copies available: 1
--- Search by Author --Books by George Orwell:
- 1984 (Classic, 1 copy available)

6.5 Assessment Criteria
Your submission will be evaluated on the following criteria:
• Correct class and object declaration;
• Proper use of primary and secondary constructors;
• Usage of the init block;
• Correct implementation of getters and setters with custom logic;
• Proper inheritance structure and use of subclasses;
• Functionality of the Library class including all required methods;
• Code organization and readability;
• Error handling for edge cases (e.g., borrowing unavailable books); and
• The use of abstract methods, companion objects, and data classes .

7

Return and Enhance your Android experience [10%]
[AC YES, AI NO]

Congratulations on reaching this section! By successfully completing all the tasks already
described, you have secured 60% of the total grade for this assignment. Now, it is up to
26

Tutorial 1 - Hello Kotlin. Hello Android World!
you to take the initiative and enhance your Android learning experience by proactively
adding additional tasks. You will earn more 10% in your grade, with these actions. Here
are some ideas for achieve it:
• Explore and learn how to use the Android Debug Bridge (ADB) in console
mode;
• Implement a landscape layout for your Hello World application; and
• Add new features or improvements according to your interests.
The teacher will evaluate your additional work based on its diﬀiculty, originality, and
quality. Take this opportunity to challenge yourself, explore new concepts and deepen
your understanding of Android development.

8

Assisted code generation - MIP [20%] [AC YES, AI YES]

Automatic code generation and agentic programming represent a major shift in the way
software engineering is approached and practiced. Rather than relying solely on manual
coding and traditional development workflows, these technologies enable systems to assist
developers by generating code, suggesting solutions, and even taking autonomous actions
within the development process.
This evolution is transforming software engineering into a more collaborative effort
between humans and intelligent agents, improving productivity, accelerating development
cycles, and reducing repetitive tasks. As agentic systems become more capable, they are
also reshaping how software is designed, tested, and maintained, marking a significant
step toward more adaptive and intelligent development environments.

Your Mission (your Mission Impossible Possible (MIP-1)
In this section, the use of AI is mandatory and you can earn the remaining 20% of your
grade. You may use a variety of plugins, tools, and Large Language Models to support
your work, including: Google Antigravity (https://antigravity.google/), Claude
Code (https://claude.com/product/claude-code), GitHub automation tools such as
co-pilot, or (https://github.com/copilot) depending on what best fits your workflow.
The objective of this task is to develop a new mobile application in Android Studio
and Kotlin. You are free to decide on the type of application and its level of complexity,
which will be considered during the evaluation. You are invited to explore other API that
work with images. Try this site (or any other): https://apipheny.io/free-api/
For Example. You may build a weather application with a map in the main
screen. The user should be able to tap on a location on the map and view the corresponding weather information displayed in another screen. This basic concept
can then be expanded with additional features such as forecasts, saved locations, or
live updates.

27

Tutorial 1 - Hello Kotlin. Hello Android World!
You are encouraged to use all available AI tools to support your learning, but you
must make all the effort to understand the generated code and how the development
environment works. Use the AI to explain the code for you. This includes understanding
how the code is deployed to both physical and virtual devices, as well as how debugging is
performed. When you present this task to your teacher, you will be questioned
about these aspects.

AI-Assisted Software Engineering Tools
We recommend using Google Antigravity. In Antigravity, you can specify mobile
application requirements using two primary methods:
• Direct prompting, best suited for active development and quick iteration; and
• Markdown-based configuration, useful for persistent project rules and automated workflows.
Direct Prompting (Best for Rapid Start)
The most common way to begin building an app is to provide a detailed prompt in the
Agent Manager.
• Planning Mode: Ensure that the agent is set to Planning Mode (not Fast Mode)
via the side panel. This forces the agent to generate an Implementation Plan and a
structured task list before writing any code.
• Prompt Structure: A high-quality prompt should include: Context + Goal +
Constraints + Plan + Verification + Deliverables. See text box with title: Example
Prompt for APP in Android.
• Iterative Refinement: Start with the user interface only, then add logic, persistence, and external APIs in subsequent prompts.

28

Tutorial 1 - Hello Kotlin. Hello Android World!
Example Prompt for APP in Android (Kotlin + XML Views)
Context: You are an autonomous software engineering agent tasked with creating
a production-quality, greenfield native Android mobile application using Kotlin,
XML-based Views, Android Studio, and Material Design 3.
Goal: Create a mobile application named “Weather Buddy” that displays a map
on the main screen. The user must be able to tap on a location on the map and
view the corresponding weather information on a separate screen.
Constraints: Use the latest stable Android SDK, Kotlin, XML layouts (Views
system), Material Design 3 components, and follow widely adopted Android best
practices and architectural guidelines. Use an appropriate maps SDK and a public
weather API to retrieve weather data for the selected location.
Plan: Before executing any commands or generating code, produce a detailed
project plan artifact for approval that defines the recommended architecture (e.g.,
MVVM), folder structure, key dependencies with justification, theming approach,
navigation strategy between screens, state management, assumptions, risks, and
scalability considerations.
Verification: Ensure the proposal is complete, maintainable, suitable for future
expansion, and compatible with modern Android development standards.
Deliverables: Provide the detailed project plan artifact and wait for explicit approval before implementation.
Markdown Files (Best for Persistent Rules)
If you want to enforce consistent standards across your project, Antigravity supports using
.md (Markdown) files inside your workspace.
• Rules (.agent/rules/*.md): These define persistent instructions that the agent
always follows, such as coding conventions (e.g., PEP 8, Google Java Style Guide)
or modular architecture constraints.
• Workflows (.agent/workflows/*.md): These are reusable saved prompts triggered by /commands in the chat (e.g., /generate-tests) to automate repetitive
development tasks.
• Skills (SKILL.md): Advanced users can define specialized “Skills” in dedicated
folders, allowing the agent to load tools or scripts only when relevant to the current
request.
Overall, Antigravity provides an excellent opportunity to explore AI-assisted development workflows in a realistic software engineering environment. Go ahead, and use AI to
learn more about this.

Procedure Summary in the Antigravity
1. Open Workspace: Create a new workspace (directory).
2. Set Mode: Switch the agent conversation mode to Planning Mode.
29

Tutorial 1 - Hello Kotlin. Hello Android World!
3. Define Specifications: Input your mobile app requirements (e.g., use Kotlin and
XML Views) via a detailed prompt.
4. Review Plan: Approve the artifacts generated by the agent in the implementation
plan.
5. Authorize Execution: Click Accept on proposed terminal commands to allow
the agent to modify your file system or execute commands (like checking version
version, find in files, replace in files, ...) if the command looks OK to you.
6. Verify Results: Use the integrated emulator or browser preview to test the agent’s
work through generated walkthrough artifacts.
7. Add version control: Click on the Source Control icon (below the Code Search
icon) to add the code to a local Git repository - press Initialize Repository; then
Generate a comment to the current changes; and press Commit (then select Save
all changes and Commit option).
8. Iterate: Iterate as many times as necessary with the agent until your app satisfies
all functional and design requirements.
Have fun and good vibes!

30

